---
title: paper_pen
pages: 8
---

# Trang 1

PEN: Prediction-Explanation Network to Forecast Stock Price Movement with Better Explainability Shuqi Li1*, Weiheng Liao2*, Yuhan Chen1*, Rui Yan1, 3† 1Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence (GSAI), Renmin University of China 2MADE by DATA‡ 3Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, Ministry of Education shuqili@ruc.edu.cn, weiheng@madebydata.com, yuhanchen@ruc.edu.cn, ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn Abstract Nowadays explainability in stock price movement prediction is attracting increasing attention in banks, hedge funds and asset managers, primarily due to audit or regulatory reasons. Text data such as financial news and social media posts can be part of the reasons for stock price movement. To this end, we propose a novel framework of Prediction-Explanation Net- work (PEN) jointly modeling text streams and price streams with alignment. The key component of the PEN model is an shared representation learning module that learns which texts are possibly associated with the stock price movement by modeling the interaction between the text data and stock price data with a salient vector characterizing their correla- tion. In this way, the PEN model is able to predict the stock price movement by identifying and utilizing abundant mes- sages while on the other hand, the selected text messages also explain the stock price movement. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that we are able to kill two birds with one stone: in terms of accuracy, the proposed PEN model out- performs the state-of-art baseline; on explainability, the PEN model are demonstrated to be far superior to attention mecha- nism, capable of picking out the crucial texts with a very high confidence. Introduction Stock price movement prediction, a hugely challenging but equally rewarding task, has always drawn enormous interest from both academia and industry (Frankel and Frankel 1995; Bollen, Mao, and Zeng 2011; Edwards, Magee, and Bassetti 2018). Classical approaches like time series analysis have continued to remain popular due to their simple structures and intepretability. In recent years, deep learning techniques have gained much popularity due to its ability to improve the prediction accuracy when there are large quantities of training data, as often is the case of financial markets. For better prediction, an external network becomes a pos- sible solution via alignment of financial news commentaries and social media posts, revealing rich information about the market, far beyond price, trading volume or financial KPIs *These authors contributed equally. †Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn) ‡https://www.madebydata.com Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.(Xing, Cambria, and Welsch 2018; Jiang 2021; Si et al. 2013; Schumaker and Chen 2009). The aligned text streams are to some extent explaining the prediction from an external perspective other than the stock price time series. The use of deep text mining algorithms to model text data also makes a massive difference. For this kind of models, we observe two facts. 1) Not all the texts are equally useful in predicting the future, and those unimportant texts shall be filtered out. 2) When investors make investments decisions, they only fo- cus on a small subset of key information. With these motivations in mind, we propose a model named Prediction-Explanation Network (PEN) to jointly predict the stock price movement and explore probable ef- fect factors. The key component of the proposed PEN model is a shared representation learning (SRL) module to analyze text embeddings and stock price series jointly and learn their shared representation from their correlation. To be more spe- cific, this component selects the stock price data and the cor- responding salient text information, fuse them into a single representation vector. To better incorporate stochastic fac- tors, we leverage the variant of Variational Auto-Encoders (V AE) to generate stock movements from latent variables. To sum up, the key contributions of our work include: •A novel framework for stock price movement prediction with better explainability through alignment of stock price streams and text streams. •A key shared representation learning (SRL) module which models the interaction between text data and stock price data and produces better text and price embeddings. •A salient regulator that is inspired by individual in- vestors’ decision process and specifically designed to work within the PEN framework in order to maximize the explain- ability of texts. We conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets to verify the effectiveness of the proposed PEN model. Ex- periments on two distinct datasets spanning two different time periods show that PEN outperforms the existing state- of-art models, demonstrating that focusing on the right in- formation can indeed help to make a better prediction. Related Work Stock Price Movement Prediction. Traditional approach tends to focus on identifying patterns and correlations in The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23) 5187

---

# Trang 2

trading prices and volumes to predict the direction of price movement in the future. In recent years, researchers suc- cessfully exploited text information in stock price predic- tion, taking advantage of the unprecedented increase of on- line text data such as news and social media posts. This type of models are possible because news, announcements and sometimes rumours may have a direct impact on stock price. Li et al. (2014) projected textual news onto the sentiment space and implement a generic stock price prediction frame- work. Khadjeh Nassirtoussi et al. (2015) proposed predict intraday directional-movements of a currency-pair in the for- eign exchange market based on the text of breaking financial news-headlines. Hu et al. (2018) designed a Hybrid Atten- tion Networks to predict the stock trend based on the se- quence of recent related news. Xu and Cohen (2018) took a step further, their multi-layer StockNet ingests both stock price data and tweets data, uses attentions and variational autoencoders to extract latent information and makes pre- diction. Carta et al. (2021) propose a feature engineering process to create an extended set of features extracted using generated lexicons and news. While models with either just text data, or just stock price data have been demonstrated to yield fairly good prediction results, many believe that mod- els that make sense of both type of datasets can be a game changer. This is because stock price is greatly influenced by both what’s happening in the market (which is captured by text data) and past patterns (which can be learnt from histor- ical stock price). Prediction Explainability. Despite big advances in deep stock price prediction models, their adoption is unfortu- nately very limited due to their “black box” nature. So far only a tiny number of research articles have attempted to ad- dress prediction explainability. Past work includes Hu et al. (2018) analyzed attention weights of text corpora to empir- ically study the importance of different news articles, and Dang, Shah, and Zerfos (2019) proposed a multi-modality neural model to discover news relevant to stock prediction. In this paper, we take a step further to propose a Shared Representation Learning (SRL) module, which jointly anal- yses text embeddings and stock price series and learns their shared representation. This module generates a Vector of Salience (V oS) to explain the importance of individual text documents in the corpora, which is then further regulated in the learning objective to maximize explainability and im- prove prediction accuracy. Prediction-Explanation Network Problem Description We formulate the stock price movement prediction problem as a classification task. For one stock, given the past text cor- poraCand historical prices dataset P[t−L, t−1]where Lis the fixed lag size, the objective is to predict the move- ment yof the stock on next day t. The movement ycan be constructed as binary: y= 1, pt> pt−1 0, pt≤pt−1(1) where ptdenotes the adjusted close prices at day tfor the given stock. The adjusted close price amends a stock’s Figure 1: The overall framework of our model PEN. closing price to reflect that stock’s value after accounting for any corporate actions, which is often used as an important element to predict stock price movement (Yoo et al. 2021). Overall Architecture We summarize the overall architecture of our proposed stock price Prediction-Explanation Network (PEN) in Fig- ure 1. It comprises four main components: Text Embedding Layer (TEL) captures text information and obtains lower- dimensional representations; Shared Representation Learn- ing (SRL) models the interaction between text data and stock price data and produces Vector of Salient (V oS) that indi- cates the importance of each text; Deep Recurrent Genera- tion (DRG) infers the latent variable Zand decodes yfrom ZandX; Temporal Attention Prediction (TAP) employs at- tention mechanism to produce the final prediction from mul- tiple predictions at different time steps. Text Embedding Layer In order to capture the information from the past and future words as its context and obtain lower-dimensional represen- tations, we leverage a bi-directional GRU layer. For a stock ontth trading day, the word embedding representation of texts is defined as Ct= [Ct1, Ct2, . . . , C tm, . . . , C tM]∈ RM×l×hw, where Mdenotes the number of texts and Ctmdenotes word embedding matrix for mth text with length land hidden size hw. We run the bi-directional GRU layer for every text to obtain text embeddings. Then, all texts in a day can be represent as the matrix et= [et1, et2, . . . , e tm, . . . , e tM]∈Rh×M,etm∈Rh×1is the embedding of mth text in tth trading day with hidden size h. The maximum number of tokens included in a text and the maximum number of texts on a single trading day are set to 30 and 20, respectively. Shared Representation Learning For price data in tth trading day of a stock, The price vector ˜pt= ˜pc t,˜ph t,˜pl t ∈RL×3consists of adjusted close price pc t, high price ph tand low price pl t. After normalization with pt= ˜pt/˜pt−1−1,pt∈RL×3is as input sent into SRL. SRL ingests the text embeddings et∈Rh×Mand price datapt∈RL×3and learns their shared representation. Dif- 5188

---

# Trang 3

Figure 2: The detailed structure of SRL module. We use information, including texts and prices, of 02/07 - 04/07 to predict stock movement of 05/07 for illustration. ferent SRL modules are connected at different time steps, resulting in a recurrent structure. Each SRL module consists of three units, Text Selection Unit (TSU), Text Memory Unit (TMU), Information Fusion Unit (IFU). The details of SRL are shown in Figure 2. Text Selection Unit. Raw text data obtained is usually highly general, and is not step-wise synchronized with stock price time series. Furthermore, large variance in texts quality means some input texts may be totally irrelevant in predict- ing stock price movement, hence may bring more noise to our prediction objective. Here, we construct a Text Selec- tion Unit (TSU) to select the useful text embeddings in a day and generate a Vector of Salience (V oS) ωt∈RM×1, in which each single scalar represents the importance of indi- vidual text. ωt=softmax kT ttanh(W1ht−1+W2et+b1) it=etωt(2) We generate initial hidden state h0∈Rh×1by Xavier al- gorithm (Glorot and Bengio 2010) and ht−1is the former hidden state. it∈Rh×1is text embedding weighted vector. W1, W2, ktare weight matrices and b1is bias. Text Memory Unit. As it takes time for the market to digest news and announcements, the past information con- tained in texts is valuable and cannot simply be discarded. Taking this into consideration and inspired by the structure of a LSTM cell, we design a Text Memory Unit to preserve important information in text embeddings over time, with forget gate ftand output gate otto regulate information flowing in and out of the cell. ft=σ(W3[it,ht−1] +b3)ot=σ(W4[it,ht−1] +b4) lt=tanh(W5[it,ht−1] +b5)lt=ftlt−1+otlt (3) lt∈Rh×1is text memory state with hidden state h, and it is initialized by Xavier algorithm. W3, W4, W5are weight matrices and b3, b4, b5are biases.Information Fusion Unit. The key idea of the SRL mod- ule is to learn the shared representation for texts and stock prices then exploit the interaction patterns to identify the important texts. We introduce an Information Fusion Unit (IFU), which ingests text embeddings and stock prices, and fuses them together. dt=σ(W6[pt, lt, ht−1])hl=tanh(W7[lt, ht−1]) hp=tanh(W8[pt, ht−1])ht=dthp+ (1−dt)hl(4) where the hidden state ht∈Rh×1, is the shared representa- tion of text memory ltand price information pt.W6, W7, W8 are weight matrices. It is worth noting that the hidden state htof IFU is also an output of the SRL module, which is then used to next SRL module at the next time step t+ 1. We regard the last hidden stateht, i.e. the hidden state of the last day in time lag, as input of deep recurrent generation module. Deep Recurrent Generation A variational auto-encoder provides a probabilistic manner for describing an observation in latent space. Inspired by the stocknet (Xu and Cohen 2018), we use a recurrent varia- tional auto-encoder to generate stock price movements. Given input X= [x1;. . .;xT]for every trading day t∈[1, . . . , T ]where xt=htis the output of IFU. In variational auto-encoder, we need to construct latent vari- ableZ= [z1;. . .;zT]and then predict stock movement y= [y1, . . . , y T]. Formally, we have to model the condi- tional probability distribution pθ(y|X)and its factorization is as follows pθ(y|X) =R Zpθ(y, Z|X) =R Zpθ(yT|X, Z)pθ(zT|z<T, X)QT−1 t=1pθ(yt|x≤t, zt)pθ(zt|z<t, x≤t, yt)(5) As it is shown in above equation, we need to infer the intractable posterior distribution pθ(Z|X, y). A common 5189

---

# Trang 4

way to solve this problem is to generate a distribution qϕ(Z|X,y)by variational inference (Jordan et al. 1999) to approximate pθ(Z|X,y)and then simulate qϕ(Z|X, y)by using reparameterization in neural network. Here an alternative way is used to restrict the family of distributions qϕ(Z|X, y). Suppose Zcan be partitioned into disjoint time classes, we then assume that the approx- imate distribution factorizes with respect to different time points as follows, qϕ(Z|X, y) =TY t=1qϕ(zt|z<t, x≤t, yt) (6) The likelihood of our target conditional probability distribu- tionpθ(y|X)can be decomposed into, logpθ(y|X) = logZ Zpθ(y, Z|X)dZ +Eqϕ(Z|X,y)[logpθ(y|X, Z)] −DKL[qϕ(Z|X, y)∥pθ(Z|X)](7) Therefore, minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence be- tween pθ(Z|X, y)and its approximation qϕ(Z|X, y) equals maximizing the last two terms of Eq. (7). i.e. the vari- ational recurrent lower bound as follows, L(θ, ϕ;X, y) =TX t=1Eqϕ(zt|z<t,x≤t,yt){logpθ(yt|x, z)− DKL[qϕ(zt|z<t, x≤t, yt)∥pθ(zt|z<t, x≤t)]} ≤logpθ(y|X) (8) We assume that when t < T ,ytis independent of z≤t so that pθ(yt|x, z)in the Eq. (8) equals to pθ(yt|x≤t, zt) while pθ(yt|x, z)=pθ(yt|X, Z). Recurrent Variational Encoder & Decoder. We use a Recurrently Variational Auto-encoder based (Li et al. 2017) framework to conduct variational inference and gen- eration. In the encoder and decoder stage, GRU is em- ployed as the basic recurrent model to extract informa- tion from input and decode from latent variable instead of Fully Connected Layer. We assume that both the prior and posterior of the latent variables are of Gaussian distri- bution. namely, pθ(zt|z<t, x≤t)∼ N  zt;µθ, σ2 θI and qϕ(zt|z<t, x≤t, yt)∼ N zt;µϕ, σ2 ϕI . For the posterior, denoting the hidden state of encoder GRU as henc t= GRU  xt, henc t−1 and its shared representa- tion with ztashzϕ t=tanh  Wϕ z[zt−1, xt, henc t, yt] +bϕ z , so we can calculate µϕ t,log(σϕ t)2and reparameterize the posterior ztby, ( µϕ t=Wϕ z,µϕhzϕ t+bϕ µϕ log(σϕ t)2=Wϕ z,σϕhzϕ t+bϕ σϕ⇒zpost t=µϕ t+σϕ t⊙ϵ (9) where ϵ∼ N (0, I)is white Gaussian noise, Wϕ z,µϕ, Wϕ z,σϕ are weight matrices and bϕ µϕ, bϕ σϕare bias vectors. For the prior, the shared representation of ztandhenc t ishzθ t=tanh  Wθ z[zt−1, xt, henc t] +bθ z , and µθ t,log(σθ t)2 Figure 3: The detailed structure of DRG module and TAP module which work together to predict ˆyt. and the prior ztare calculated by, ( µθ t=Wθ o,µθhzθ t+bθ µϕ log(σθ t)2=Wθ o,σθhzθ t+bθ σθ⇒zprior t =µθ t(10) where Wθ o,µθ, Wθ o,σθare weight matrices and bθ µθ, bθ σθare bias vectors. Then we integrate the recurrent generative de- coding component with the discriminative deterministic de- coding component to predict stock price movement ˆytby, hdec t=tanh Wdech xt, henc t, zprior t, zpost ti +bdec ˆyt=softmax  Wyhdec t+by , t < T (11) where Wdec, Wyare weight matrices and bdec, byare bias vectors. Temporal Attention Prediction To explore the relationship between prediction target ˆyT with its former information [ˆy1,ˆy2, . . . , ˆyT−1], we adopt a temporal attention mechanism as shown in Figure 3. The de- coder hidden state Hdec= [hdec 1, . . . , hdec T−1]is used to cal- culate attention weight. The dependency score vector qdec, information score vector kdec, normalized attention weight vector wdecand value vector vdecare denoted as follows, respectively. qdec= (hdec T)⊤tanh  WqHdec kdec=w⊤ ktanh  WkHdec wdec=softmax  qdec⊙(kdec)⊤ vdec= [ˆy1,ˆy2, . . . , ˆyT−1](12) where Wq, Wkare weight matrices. qdecrepresents the hid- den state of Tth trading day, information score vector kdec includes stock movements information of the past trading days and the weight vector wdecmeasures the correlation between target day with the past trading days. Finally, we have target prediction ˆytas a temporal atten- tion of hidden states as follows, ˆyT=softmax( WT dec[vdec(wdec)⊤, hdec T] +bdec)(13) where WT decis a weight matrix and bdecis a bias vector. 5190

---

# Trang 5

Figure 4: Performance comparison of PEN and Stocknet under different λt. The left chart shows the results on ACL18, and the right on DJIA. PEN performs significantly better than Stocknet over all λtacross both datasets. Learning Objective As its name suggests, the learning objective of PEN con- sists of two parts: to maximize the prediction accuracy and to maximize the explainability of prediction results by se- lecting the most relevant input texts. Based on Eq. (8), the objective Ltoftth day t∈ [1, . . . , T ]can be isolated as Lt= log pθ(yt|x≤t, z≤t) −λrDKL[qϕ(zt|z<t, x≤t, yt)∥pθ(zt|z<t, x≤t)] (14) where λr∈(0,1]is a decay weight from the KL term an- nealing trick. We then apply temporal attentions to Ltand average samples to formulate the first optimization objec- tive: L1(θ, ϕ;X, y) =1 NNX nwobjL(n) t (15) where wobj= [λtwdec,1]is the global temporal weight vec- tor, which can be adjusted by the hyper parameter λt. For explainability, we design a salient regulator to strengthen SRL module’s capability of information concen- tration. This can be achieved by maximize the Kullback- Leibler divergence between V oS ωtand discrete uniform distribution. So formally, another optimization objective is as follows, L2(θ, ϕ;X, y) =DKL[ωt∥pu]. where pu∼ U(M)is the discrete uniform distribution, and Mis the number of texts in a sample. Combining the two objectives with equal weight to avoid excessive parameter tuning, we have the overall objective: L(θ, ϕ;X, y) =L1(θ, ϕ;X, y) +L2(θ, ϕ;X, y) (16) Experiments Experimental Setup Datasets. We train and evaluate our model on two datasets: ACL18 (Xu and Cohen 2018) and Daily News for Stock Price Movement Prediction Dataset (DJAI)1. We 1https://www.kaggle.com/aaron7sun/stocknews.choose these two datasets because 1) they span two distinct time periods; 2) ACL18 is for individual stocks while DJIA is for stock market indices; 3) they include two completely different types of text data: news articles and social media posts (tweets). ACL18 includes the text data and historical price for 88 highly traded US stocks between 2014-01-01 and 2016-01-01 from 9 industries. Texts are tweets retrieved from Twitter and the historical prices data are collected from Yahoo Finance. We process ACL18 in the same way as pro- posed in (Xu and Cohen 2018). DJIA includes news and price data on Dow Jones Industrial Average from 2008-06- 08 to 2016-07-01, where news data is consisted of the top 25 headlines of Reddit WorldNews Channel every day. Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate the accuracy of model results by two metrics: accuracy (ACC) and Matthews Cor- relation Coefficient (MCC)(Xu and Cohen 2018). Parameters Setup. With our PEN model we use Tensor- flow to construct the computational graph, initialize all bias zero, all weights with Xavier algorithm (Glorot and Bengio 2010), and optimize the final loss by Adam with learning rate of 1e-3. We use 32 shuffled samples in a batch and a 5-day lag window for model to learn historical context. We set the size of hidden state in SRL module and in word em- bedding to be 100 and 50, respectively. Besides, we use the input dropout rate of 0.4 to regularize latent variables. As the DJIA dataset is relatively small, we use the models trained on ACL18 as pre-trained models and then fine tune them on DJIA dataset for all baselines. Baselines. We compare PEN with the following baselines. •Random: randomly generated movement predictions. •Random Forest / RF (Pagolu et al. 2016): a Random Forest classifier using sentiment analysis with Word2vec. •HAN (Hu et al. 2018): a hybrid attention networks based on related news. •Stocknet (Xu and Cohen 2018): a deep generative model jointly exploiting text and price signals. •CPC (Wang et al. 2021): a copula-based contrastive pre- dictive coding method which models relevant macroeco- nomic variables to improve prediction accuracy. 5191

---

# Trang 6

97.6 67.2 12.499.9 99.2 98.9 020406080100120 1～5 6～10 >10RTT Number of texts in a sampleHAN PENFigure 5: A further comparison on explainability: RTT met- ric varies with the number of texts in a single sample. Results of Prediction Accuracy First we make a comparison on ACC and MCC between PEN and Stocknet with a varied λt(see Eq. (15)) which controls the impact of past loss. As is shown in Figure 4, PEN outperforms Stocknet for almost every value of param- eterλt, and achieves the best performance on ACL18 when λt= 0.1, and on DJIA when λt= 0.7. These two λtvalues are adopted in PEN to carry out the rest of experiments. ModelsACL18 DJIA ACC(%) MCC ACC(%) MCC Random 50.8900 -0.002266 50.2435 0.000360 RF 53.0800 0.012929 52.6455 0.050990 HAN 57.6400 0.051800 53.2258 0.060150 Stocknet 58.2300 0.080796 56.9231 0.136909 CPC 59.1100 0.181700 - - PEN 59.8976 0.155652 60.5128 0.220423 Table 1: Prediction results of baseline models and PEN. These results show that PEN is the best performing model on both datasets under the two accuracy criterion. In Table 1, we report the prediction performance of the baselines and PEN. As is shown, PEN outperforms all base- lines except CPC on accuracy as well as MCC across both datasets. In particular it outperforms Stocknet by (1.67% , 0.07) on ACL18 and (3.59%, 0.08) on DJIA in ACC and MCC respectively. PEN also outperforms CPC, which uses additional macroeconomic data in addition to ACL18 base- line dataset, on all metrics except MCC on ACL18 dataset. Overall, the results in this section clearly demonstrate that the proposed Shared Representation Learning module and the V oS regulation mechanism can indeed enhance the per- formance of stock movement prediction. Results of Explainability We evaluate the explainability from two aspects: •Attention: is the model able to focus on a small subset of text corpora for explanation? •Relevance: is the small subset of text corpora identified indeed relevant for stock price movement prediction? As our interviews with several event-driven hedge fund managers reveal they don’t look beyond one or two piecesof news to make their investment decisions, we examine the former by calculating a Ratio of Top Two (RTT), which is the percentage of samples where the top two texts (with highest attention or V oS weights) account for over 95% weights over the total number of samples. For the latter, we select a random 1,000 test examples from ACL18 dataset, generate their respective attention weights (from HAN) and V oS (from PEN), and invite three experienced investors to independently rate each news arti- cle/tweet in those samples. For each sample we ask them to pick a single text document they believe are most rele- vant in predicting the next price movement. Then we calcu- late a Ratio of Relevance (RoR) score which is the number of samples where the top-weighted text (by HAN or PEN) agrees with at least one of the three investors’ top picks, over the total number of samples. We also conduct an agree- ment evaluation calculating the average Fleiss’ kappa score between the top picks by the algorithm and those of three individual investors. The Fleiss’ kappa score is defined as κ= (¯P−¯Pe)/(1−¯Pe), where 1−¯Pegives the degree of agreement that is attainable above chance, and ¯P−¯Pegives the degree of agreement actually achieved above chance. The results are summarized in the Table 2. Model RTT (%) RoR (%) Kappa score HAN 68.3 54.8 0.430 PEN 99.5 89.3 0.591 Table 2: A Comparison of HAN and PEN on Explainability Metrics RTT, RoR and Kappa. It is shown that our SRL modules are able to focus on just one or two salient texts out of all available text corpora for 99.5% of the test samples, significantly more concentrated than standard attention weights. Moreover, among the sam- ples for human inspection, 89.3% of PEN’s top rated texts agree with at least one human investor with an average kappa score of 0.591. This further demonstrates the effectiveness of SRL module’s selection mechanism. We further compare the RTT ratios of PEN and HAN over samples with different number of text documents. The re- sults, in Figure 5, show that a large text corpora doesn’t seem to present any challenges to SRL, manifested by a consistent RTT despite increased size of texts. As examples of qualitative evaluation, we present a cou- ple of examples from ACL18 and DJIA datasets to illus- trate how V oS generated by SRL compares with normal at- tention weights. Table 3 show the top texts picked out by PEN, the corresponding V oS of those texts, and attention weights from HAN. Note the columns ”Ground Truth” (GT) indicates the number of individual investors who has the text as their top pick over the total number of human as- sessors (which is 3). The most relevant texts for Apple on 10/22/2015 are shown in the top half of Table 3. In this par- ticular sample, SRL assigns a V oS weight of 0.994 to in- vestors’ top pick while the second ranked only receives a weight of 0.00386. The top picks by PEN are the same picks by investors. Similarly, the bottom half of Table 3 shows the 5192

---

# Trang 7

11/16/2015 Apple (\ $APPL) HAN PEN GT Tweets 1.13E-01 9.94E-01 3/3 analysts set apple target price at \$144.65 \$aapl 1.12E-01 3.86E-03 0/3 apple ring : newest patent application is a touch s creen enabled wearable for your finger \$aapl 1.09E-01 1.52E-03 0/3 apple : the new arms race \$aapl 1.06E-01 1.01E-04 0/3 supertrades could buy a freakin house with this recent win ! ! \$mbly \$aapl \$jcp \$tasr \$goog 1.01E-01 9.09E-05 0/3 \$aapl profitsnatcher: well played did not see this drop 04/06/2015 Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) 8.31E-02 7.88E-01 3/3 Russia Is On The Dawn of a Prolonged Recession as Oil Prices Stay Low and Sanctions Remain in Effect 8.59E-02 2.12E-01 0/3 Istanbul police kill woman carrying bomb near police HQ 6.64E-02 5.97E-05 0/3 Syria: Isis Destroys Tons of ’US-Made Halal Chicken’ while Millions Go Hungry 7.67E-02 8.48E-06 0/3 Ban against a single blog post leads Turkish ISPs to censor all of WordPress 6.57E-02 8.41E-08 0/3 HSBC is ’cast-iron certain’ to breach banking rules again, executive admits Table 3: Qualitative comparison of V oS and attention weights on dataset ACL18 and DJIA. We show the top five texts picked by PEN at 10/22/2015 of Apple and at 04/06/2015 of DJIA. news of Dow Jones on 04/26/2016 from DJIA dataset. Whether it’s the summary statistics in Table 2 or the sam- ples in Tables 3, we observe a great degree of consistency between V oS weights and the ground truth. This clearly demonstrates that SRL modules are highly effective in iden- tifying the important text contexts in predicting the future stock price movement. Ablation Studies Variations in PEN Architecture. To understand the con- tributions of different components in PEN, We conduct a number of ablation experiments where we remove TAP, DRG, SRL, KL-loss from PEN, respectively. The results, shown in Table 4, indicate that each and every part of PEN contributes to the overall model performance. Note when SRL is ablated, we use the normalized attention weights to handle text corpora as described in (Xu and Cohen 2018); this has lead to a reduction in ACC of 3.8% and 4.1% on ACL18 and DJIA, respectively, suggesting SRL modules are far superior to standard attention mechanism in measuring the relevance of text corpora for better prediction. ModelACL18 DJIA ACC(%) MCC ACC(%) MCC w/o TAP 52.3891 0.027687 57.4359 0.0148 w/o DRG 51.7065 0.018908 56.9231 0.1587 w/o SRL 56.1433 0.073811 56.4103 0.1422 w/o KL 56.6553 0.058124 56.8462 0.0940 Full inputs 59.8976 0.155652 60.5128 0.2204 Table 4: An ablation study of architecture of PEN. Stock Price Components. We also carry out a number of ablation experiments where we remove adjusted close prices, high prices and low prices from inputs to see howimportant they are. The results are summarized in Table 5. We observe that high and low prices are far more important than adjusted close price in this task. This seems to reaffirm the belief by many investors that volatility, reflected by the high and low prices, is a crucial characteristic of a stock. We also notice that full data enables PEN to perform the best, which suggests all types of price are valuable in prediction. InputsACL18 DJIA ACC(%) MCC ACC(%) MCC w/o High 45.7338 0.0372 50.3413 0.0086 w/o Low 50.3413 0.0086 50.7692 0.0721 w/o Adj-close 57.6792 0.0890 55.3846 0.1319 Full inputs 59.8976 0.1556 60.5128 0.2204 Table 5: An ablation study of inputs on ACL18 and DJIA. Conclusions As a step to address the challenges of explainability in stock price movement prediction, we propose a Prediction- Explanation Network (PEN). The core of PEN is the Shared Representation Learning (SRL) module, which models the interaction between the text data and stock price data and outputs a Vector of Salience to explain the importance of texts related to stock prices changes. Inspired by the criti- cal thinking process of investors, we further introduce such a regulation mechanism that SRL module focuses the small- est number of texts possible to maximize the explainabil- ity. Our experiments demonstrate that not only SRL module is capable of identifying highly relevant texts that explain the future stock price movements, but also greatly enhances the accuracy of our stock price movement prediction model PEN, which establishes new state-of-art accuracy across two benchmark datasets covering two distinct markets. 5193

---

# Trang 8

Acknowledgments This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC Grant No. 62122089 and No. 61876196), Beijing Outstanding Young Scientist Program NO. BJJWZYJH012019100020098, and Intelligent Social Governance Platform, Major Innovation & Planning Inter- disciplinary Platform for the ”Double-First Class” Initiative, Renmin University of China. We also wish to acknowledge the support provided and contribution made by Public Pol- icy and Decision-making Research Lab of RUC. Rui Yan is supported by Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI) and CCF-Tencent Rhino-Bird Open Research Fund. References Bollen, J.; Mao, H.; and Zeng, X. 2011. Twitter mood pre- dicts the stock market. Journal of computational science, 2(1): 1–8. Carta, S. M.; Consoli, S.; Piras, L.; Podda, A. S.; and Recu- pero, D. R. 2021. Explainable Machine Learning Exploiting News and Domain-Specific Lexicon for Stock Market Fore- casting. IEEE Access, 9: 30193–30205. Dang, X.-H.; Shah, S. Y .; and Zerfos, P. 2019. ” The Squawk Bot”: Joint Learning of Time Series and Text Data Modal- ities for Automated Financial Information Filtering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.10858. Edwards, R. D.; Magee, J.; and Bassetti, W. C. 2018. Tech- nical analysis of stock trends. CRC press. Frankel, J. A.; and Frankel, B. 1995. Financial markets and monetary policy. MIT Press. Glorot, X.; and Bengio, Y . 2010. Understanding the diffi- culty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Pro- ceedings of the thirteenth international conference on arti- ficial intelligence and statistics, 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings. Hu, Z.; Liu, W.; Bian, J.; Liu, X.; and Liu, T.-Y . 2018. Lis- tening to chaotic whispers: A deep learning framework for news-oriented stock trend prediction. In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM international conference on web search and data mining, 261–269. Jiang, W. 2021. Applications of deep learning in stock mar- ket prediction: recent progress. Expert Systems with Appli- cations, 184: 115537. Jordan, M. I.; Ghahramani, Z.; Jaakkola, T. S.; and Saul, L. K. 1999. An introduction to variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37(2): 183–233. Khadjeh Nassirtoussi, A.; Aghabozorgi, S.; Ying Wah, T.; and Ngo, D. C. L. 2015. Text mining of news-headlines for FOREX market prediction: A Multi-layer Dimension Re- duction Algorithm with semantics and sentiment. Expert Systems with Applications, 42(1): 306–324. Li, P.; Lam, W.; Bing, L.; and Wang, Z. 2017. Deep recurrent generative decoder for abstractive text summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00625. Li, X.; Xie, H.; Chen, L.; Wang, J.; and Deng, X. 2014. News impact on stock price return via sentiment analysis. Knowledge-Based Systems, 69: 14–23.Pagolu, V . S.; Reddy, K. N.; Panda, G.; and Majhi, B. 2016. Sentiment analysis of Twitter data for predicting stock mar- ket movements. In 2016 international conference on sig- nal processing, communication, power and embedded sys- tem (SCOPES), 1345–1350. IEEE. Schumaker, R. P.; and Chen, H. 2009. Textual analysis of stock market prediction using breaking financial news: The AZFin text system. ACM Transactions on Information Sys- tems (TOIS), 27(2): 1–19. Si, J.; Mukherjee, A.; Liu, B.; Li, Q.; Li, H.; and Deng, X. 2013. Exploiting topic based twitter sentiment for stock pre- diction. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 24–29. Wang, G.; Cao, L.; Zhao, H.; Liu, Q.; and Chen, E. 2021. Coupling Macro-Sector-Micro Financial Indicators for Learning Stock Representations with Less Uncertainty. AAAI21, 1–9. Xing, F. Z.; Cambria, E.; and Welsch, R. E. 2018. Natu- ral language based financial forecasting: a survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 50(1): 49–73. Xu, Y .; and Cohen, S. B. 2018. Stock Movement Predic- tion from Tweets and Historical Prices. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu- tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 1970–1979. Melbourne, Australia: Association for Computational Lin- guistics. Yoo, J.; Soun, Y .; Park, Y .-c.; and Kang, U. 2021. Accu- rate Multivariate Stock Movement Prediction via Data-Axis Transformer with Multi-Level Contexts. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discov- ery &amp; Data Mining, KDD ’21, 2037–2045. New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450383325. 5194

---

